Create shop-and-thumbnails.md (#20)
shyim/shyim.me: content/blog/shop-and-thumbnails.md

---
id: shopware-and-thumbnails
date: 2021-07-05T23:15:59

> title: Thumbnails + Shopware + PHP = 🙉

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Thumbnails + Shopware + PHP = 🙈
```

author: Shyim
author_title: Developer @ Shopware
author_url: https://github.com/shyim
author_image_url: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/6224096?s=460&u=18be3a2d46f07dd42fc2b6dee9b4b9b68bca28d2&v=4
tags: [shopware]
---

> All shop owners want a fast online shop with the best pagespeed results. The images in the shop are making a big difference in this stats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every shop owner wants a fast online shop with the best pagespeed results. The images have a huge impact on these stats.
```

> But can we archive this with just PHP?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But can we archive this with only PHP?
```

> But can we archive this with only PHP?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But can we achieve better results with only PHP?
```

## Image generation with PHP

> In PHP we have two ways how we can generate images once with the `gd` extension or with `imagemagic`. Both of this extensions are not optimized to create very small images and they are slower. Also they lack on support on newer image formats like avif (PHP 8.1 will have avif in `gd`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In PHP there are two ways how images can be generated: using the `gd`, or the `imagemagic` extension. Both of these extensions are not optimized to create very small images and they are pretty slow. They also lack support for newer image formats like avif (PHP 8.1 will have avif in `gd`).
```

> In PHP there are two ways how images can be generated: using the `gd`, or the `imagemagic` extension. Both of these extensions are not optimized to create very small images and they are pretty slow. They also lack support for newer image formats like avif (PHP 8.1 will have avif in `gd`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In PHP there are two ways how images can be generated: using the `gd`, or the `ImageMagick` extension. Both extensions are not optimized to create very small images and they are quite slow. They also lack support for newer image formats like avif (PHP 8.1 will have avif in `gd`).
```

> The PHP Community has build packages like [spatie/image-optimizer](https://github.com/spatie/image-optimizer) to optimize the image after wards by executing serval optimziers in the cli. This approach requires to have functions like `exec`, `system` or `proc_open` available, which are disabled by default on some shared hosters and the optimizers installed in the host system. But there are new technologics like `ffi` or `wasm` in php.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The PHP community has build packages like [spatie/image-optimizer](https://github.com/spatie/image-optimizer) to optimize an image after it has been uploaded by executing several optimziers in the CLI. This approach requires to have functions like `exec`, `system` or `proc_open` available, which are disabled by default on some shared hosters. Also, the optimizers need to be installed on the host system. But there are new technologies like `ffi` or `wasm` available in PHP.
```

> The PHP community has build packages like [spatie/image-optimizer](https://github.com/spatie/image-optimizer) to optimize an image after it has been uploaded by executing several optimziers in the CLI. This approach requires to have functions like `exec`, `system` or `proc_open` available, which are disabled by default on some shared hosters. Also, the optimizers need to be installed on the host system. But there are new technologies like `ffi` or `wasm` available in PHP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PHP community has build packages (like [spatie/image-optimizer](https://github.com/spatie/image-optimizer)) to optimize an image after it has been uploaded by executing several optimziers in the CLI. This approach requires to have functions like `exec`, `system` or `proc_open` available, which are disabled by default on some shared hosters. Also, the optimizers need to be installed on the host system. But there are new technologies like `ffi` or `wasm` available in PHP.
```

> ## Image generation using FFI / WASM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Image generation using FFI / WASM
```
Should be subheadline of PHP as it's part of it

> Instead requiring optimizers installed on the system, we could bring it isolated as WASM or as shared library with FFI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of requiring optimizers installed on the server system, we could bring it with the code, isolated as WASM or as a shared library with FFI.
```

> This both approaches could be very fast, but unfornuately both technologics are not widespread in the PHP ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These approaches are both very fast, but unfornuately both technologies are not widespread in the PHP ecosystem.
```

> These approaches are both very fast, but unfornuately both technologies are not widespread in the PHP ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These approaches are both very fast, but unfortunately, both technologies are not widely used in the PHP ecosystem.
```

## Letting a external service do your image processing

> When we can't create the best optimized image with just plain PHP, why not letting our image processing work done on some external service. One of my favourite image processing systems is [imgproxy](https://imgproxy.net/). It can be even selfhosted, if wanted. We save the original images on the server or an external storage like s3 and just link with it to our image processing server with some parameters like width, height etc. The server's are doing the rest for us with the best possible image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we can't create the best optimized image with just plain PHP, why not let our image processing work be done by some external service? One of my favourite image processing systems is [imgproxy](https://imgproxy.net/). It can be even selfhosted, if necessary. We save the original images on the server or an external storage like S3 and just link it to our image processing server with some parameters like width, height etc. The servers are doing the rest for us with the best possible image results.
```

> Such servers are also offering to provide better image formats when the browser supports it. Like the browser is requesting a `jpg` image, and the browser supports also `webp`. The server will respond to the `.jpg` file extension a `webp` image without even providing multiple links or using a `picture` element.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such servers are also offering to provide better image formats when the browser supports it. Like when the browser is requesting a `jpg` image, but the browser supports also `webp`. The server will respond to the `.jpg` file extension a `webp` image without even providing multiple links or using a `picture` element.
```

> **It's important** that your used processing service does cache your requests or you will have to setup a own cdn before it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**It's important** that your used processing service does cache your requests or you will have to setup a own CDN before it.
```

> When we can't create the best optimized image with just plain PHP, why not let our image processing work be done by some external service? One of my favourite image processing systems is [imgproxy](https://imgproxy.net/). It can be even selfhosted, if necessary. We save the original images on the server or an external storage like S3 and just link it to our image processing server with some parameters like width, height etc. The servers are doing the rest for us with the best possible image results.
> Such servers are also offering to provide better image formats when the browser supports it. Like when the browser is requesting a `jpg` image, but the browser supports also `webp`. The server will respond to the `.jpg` file extension a `webp` image without even providing multiple links or using a `picture` element.
> **It's important** that your used processing service does cache your requests or you will have to setup a own CDN before it.
> Let's do a quick `pro` and `contra` list of the usage of such software:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we can't create the best optimized image with just plain PHP, why not let our image processing work be done by some external service? One of my favourite image processing systems is [imgproxy](https://imgproxy.net/). It can be even selfhosted, if necessary. We save the original images on the server or an external storage like S3 and just link it to our image processing server with some parameters, like width, height etc. The servers are doing the rest for us with the best possible image results.
Such servers also offer better image formats if the browser supports it. This means, when the browser requests a `jpg` image, but the browser supports also `webp`. The server can respond to the `.jpg` file extension a `webp` image without even providing multiple links or using a [`picture` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/picture#the_type_attribute).
**It's important** that your used processing service does cache your requests or you will have to setup a own CDN before it.
Let's do a quick `pros` and `cons` list of the usage of such software:
```

> **Pro:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pros:**
```

- Best possible optimized image
- Serving better image formats as the original image (jpg => webp) without doing anything special

> - Smaller backups as we don't have to save thumbnails

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Smaller backups of the shop, as we don't have to save thumbnails
```

    - Can be even smaller when the original images are saved on a cloud bucket

> - Can be self-hosted, if needed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Can be self-hosted, if necessary
```

- Be flexible in your template and use the dimension you want instead blowing up your storage

> - Improve global your access times with some cloud image processing 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Improve your global access times with some cloud image processing 
```

    - This mostly requires that the original image are also saved on their network

**Contra:**

- When the image processing service is offline, we don't have any images in our shop anymore

> - When the original images are saved in a cloud bucket and you don't make backups. Your deleted file will be gone

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When the original images are saved in a cloud bucket and you don't make backups, our deleted file will be gone
```

> **Contra:**
> 
> - When the image processing service is offline, we don't have any images in our shop anymore
> - When the original images are saved in a cloud bucket and you don't make backups, our deleted file will be gone
> - The choosen service needs caching or you should setup a cdn before your processing service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Cons:**

- When the image processing service is offline, images in our shop cannot be loaded
- When the original images are saved in a cloud bucket and you don't make backups, our deleted file will be gone
- The choosen service needs caching or you should setup a cdn before your processing service
```

> ## How do I integrate such external service in my shopware shop?
> 
> Shopware unfortunately does not support the usage of an external service by default. **But** the guys from FriendsOfShopware has covered you with the [Thumbnail processor plugin](https://store.shopware.com/frosh69611263569f/thumbnailprocessor-mit-lazy-loading.html). This extension is free and can be installed from Shopware store or from Github. Special thanks there to [tinecet](https://github.com/tinect) the author of the extension.
> 
> What does the plugin for you:
> 
> - Disabling the Shopware own thumbnail generation
> - Allows you to define a URL template how the storefront url needs to be generated
>     - A template looks like: `https://images.weserv.nl/?url={mediaUrl}/{mediaPath}&w={width}&h={height}`
> - Adds lazy image loading to the storefront
> 
> With the usage of an cloud-bucket like s3 you can even move the original files from your disk to the bucket. For this referer to the [Shopware documentation](https://developer.shopware.com/docs/guides/hosting/infrastructure/filesystem) how to accomplish that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How do we integrate such external service in our shopware shops?

Unfortunately, Shopware does not support the usage of an external service by default. **But** the guys from FriendsOfShopware has covered you with the [Thumbnail processor plugin](https://store.shopware.com/frosh69611263569f/thumbnailprocessor-mit-lazy-loading.html). This extension is free and can be installed from Shopware store or from Github. Special thanks there to [tinecet](https://github.com/tinect) the author of the extension.

What does the plugin for us?

- Disabling the Shopware own thumbnail generation
- Allows you to define a URL template how the storefront url needs to be generated
    - A template looks like: `https://mycdn.shopdomain.com/{mediaPath}?width={width}&height={height}`
- Adds lazy image loading to the storefront
- Takes automatically care of the sizes attribute for responsive images

With the usage of an cloud-bucket like s3 we can even move the original files from disk to the bucket. For this referer to the [Shopware documentation](https://developer.shopware.com/docs/guides/hosting/infrastructure/filesystem) on how to accomplish that.
```

> ## Some image processing providers list
> 
> - [BunnyCDN](https://bunny.net/)
>     - not cheap with 9,5$/m per zone, but fast and including webp. You need to enable `Bunny Optimizer` and `Manipulation Engine`
> - [imgproxy](https://imgproxy.net)
>     - Opensource, can be selfhosted, fast and including webp and avif
> - [Images.weserv.nl](https://images.weserv.nl)
>     - Free, slow and not including webp
> - [cloudimage](https://www.cloudimage.io/en/home)
>     - Has free plan, fast and including webp
> - [Cloudflare](https://developers.cloudflare.com/images/)
>     - Only available at Business plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Some image processing providers list

- [BunnyCDN](https://bunny.net/)
    - not cheap with 9,5$/m per zone for image processing, but fast and including webp. You need to enable `Bunny Optimizer` and `Manipulation Engine`. Additionally, we can use really cheap storage and global traffic.
- [imgproxy](https://imgproxy.net)
    - Opensource, can be selfhosted, fast and including webp and avif. But needs a caching in front of it, f.e. a CDN.
- [Images.weserv.nl](https://images.weserv.nl)
    - Free, slow and not including webp
- [cloudimage](https://www.cloudimage.io/en/home)
    - Has free plan, fast and including webp
- [Cloudflare](https://developers.cloudflare.com/images/)
    - Only available at Business plan
```

## Conclusion

> Thumbnails are essential in modern web development. But do we really want to apart with it? Setting up PHP with libavif, installing optimizers on the host to optimize later after upload the images and still getting bad images on pagespeed. I am sure there are better tasks to do as these. The external services are even very cheap like with Bunnycdn for 9,5$. Give it a try and concentrate on other important tasks.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thumbnails are essential in modern web development. But do we really want wasting time for setting up PHP with libavif, installing optimizers on the host to optimize later after upload the images and still getting unsuitable images for our users and pagespeed? I am sure there are better tasks to do as these. The external services are even very cheap like with Bunnycdn for 9,5$. Give it a try and keep focusing on the things that really needs your power.
```

But can we achieve better results with only PHP?

## Image generation with PHP

In PHP there are two ways how images can be generated: using the `gd`, or the `ImageMagick` extension. Both extensions are not optimized to create very small images and they are quite slow. They also lack support for newer image formats like avif (PHP 8.1 will have avif in `gd`).
The PHP community has build packages (like [spatie/image-optimizer](https://github.com/spatie/image-optimizer)) to optimize an image after it has been uploaded by executing several optimziers in the CLI. This approach requires to have functions like `exec`, `system` or `proc_open` available, which are disabled by default on some shared hosters. Also, the optimizers need to be installed on the host system. But there are new technologies like `ffi` or `wasm` available in PHP.

### Image generation using FFI / WASM

Instead of requiring optimizers installed on the server system, we could bring it with the code, isolated as WASM or as a shared library with FFI.
These approaches are both very fast, but unfortunately, both technologies are not widely used in the PHP ecosystem.

> ## Letting a external service do your image processing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Letting a external service do our image processing
```

Such servers also offer better image formats if the browser supports it. This means, when the browser requests a `jpg` image, but the browser supports also `webp`. The server can respond to the `.jpg` file extension a `webp` image without even providing multiple links or using a [`picture` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/picture#the_type_attribute).
**It's important** that your used processing service does cache your requests or you will have to setup a own CDN before it.
Let's do a quick `pros` and `cons` list of the usage of such software:

**Pros:**

- Best possible optimized image
- Serving better image formats as the original image (jpg => webp) without doing anything special
- Smaller backups of the shop, as we don't have to save thumbnails
    - Can be even smaller when the original images are saved on a cloud bucket
- Can be self-hosted, if necessary

> - Be flexible in your template and use the dimension you want instead blowing up your storage
> - Improve your global access times with some cloud image processing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We can be flexible in our template and use the dimension we want instead blowing up your storage
- Improves the global access times with some cloud image processing 
```

    - This mostly requires that the original image are also saved on their network

**Cons:**

- When the image processing service is offline, images in our shop cannot be loaded

> - When the original images are saved in a cloud bucket and you don't make backups, our deleted file will be gone
> - The choosen service needs caching or you should setup a cdn before your processing service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the original images are saved in a cloud bucket and we don't make backups, our deleted file will be gone
- The choosen service needs caching so we should setup a cdn before your processing service
```

## How do we integrate such external service in our shopware shops?

> Unfortunately, Shopware does not support the usage of an external service by default. **But** the guys from FriendsOfShopware has covered you with the [Thumbnail processor plugin](https://store.shopware.com/frosh69611263569f/thumbnailprocessor-mit-lazy-loading.html). This extension is free and can be installed from Shopware store or from Github. Special thanks there to [tinecet](https://github.com/tinect) the author of the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, Shopware does not support the usage of an external service by default. **But** the guys from FriendsOfShopware has covered us with the [Thumbnail processor plugin](https://store.shopware.com/frosh69611263569f/thumbnailprocessor-mit-lazy-loading.html). This extension is free and can be installed from Shopware store or from Github. Special thanks there to [tinecet](https://github.com/tinect) the author of the extension.
```

What does the plugin for us?

- Disabling the Shopware own thumbnail generation

> - Allows you to define a URL template how the storefront url needs to be generated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows us to define a URL template how the storefront url needs to be generated
```

    - A template looks like: `https://mycdn.shopdomain.com/{mediaPath}?width={width}&height={height}`
- Adds lazy image loading to the storefront
- Takes automatically care of the sizes attribute for responsive images

With the usage of an cloud-bucket like s3 we can even move the original files from disk to the bucket. For this referer to the [Shopware documentation](https://developer.shopware.com/docs/guides/hosting/infrastructure/filesystem) on how to accomplish that.

## Some image processing providers list

- [BunnyCDN](https://bunny.net/)

>     - not cheap with 9,5$/m per zone for image processing, but fast and including webp. You need to enable `Bunny Optimizer` and `Manipulation Engine`. Additionally, we can use really cheap storage and global traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - not cheap with 9,5$/m per zone for image processing, but fast and including webp. We need to enable `Bunny Optimizer` and `Manipulation Engine`. Additionally, we can use really cheap storage and global traffic.
```
